I'm Sean interviewing Carl Sagan on October 19,
1993, at Boulder, Colorado. Now, Carl, for the
record, would you give us your full name? My name is
Carl Edward Sagan. Okay, and when and where were
you born? November 9, 1934, Brooklyn, New York.
When did you first get interested in astronomy?
About age five.
What part of astronomy did you get interested in,
and how did that happen? I describe this in my book,
Cosmos, and it's done much better there than I can
do it here. It's chapter six, I think. Where
did you go to undergraduate school? I got all my
earned degrees, all four of them, at the
University of Chicago. When did you get your
bachelor's degree? I got... A BA in 1954 and a BS in
physics in 1955. Did you ever take any astronomy
classes as an undergraduate? As an
undergraduate?
No, I did not. Why did you go to Chicago? I went to
Chicago because it had the only planetary
astronomer in the United States and I wanted to do
planets. That was Gerard Kuiper, and also because
the physics and chemistry departments were
extremely good. The names Enrico Fermi and Harold
Urey attracted me. But what I didn't realize is
that on showing up, I was subjecting myself to the
Hutchins
baccalaureate program in which they said that my
showing up showed that I didn't know any subjects.
and therefore it was up to them to tell me what to
study, and so they had 14-year-long courses that
were required for the bachelor's degree, which
had almost nothing to do with professional
pursuit of mathematics, physics, and astronomy,
and it was the best thing that ever happened to me
because I was too narrowly focused, and it
broadened me up. You'll recall there was a little
to-do about some magazine. You mentioned that
Kuiper was the only practicing planetary
astrophysicist in the 50s or whatever, and
someone said, Why did you say that? You said,
because it's true. Could you give us the detail?
Well, I learned this from talking to other
astronomers, which I did before going to, you
know, before applying. But, you know, think about
it. Who else was anything close to a full-time
planetary astronomer in the United States? At the
time, not John Strong, Robert Richardson at Mount
Wilson. I just don't think there were any others,
but there was Kuiper. This is 1951 I'm talking
about. Darius Kuiper had just edited the
atmospheres of the Earth and planets, had
discovered CO2 on Mars, methane on Titan, was
trying to understand the origin of the solar
system, was involved in theory and observation,
and was also not completely hostile to the idea of
life elsewhere. He was doing great guns, and there
was, as far as I know then or now, nobody else. Were
you aware that, let's put it this way, at least some
part of the astronomical establishment,
anywhere from half to 99%, considered planetary
astronomy a third-rate field at that time? I can't
remember if I was truly aware of that at the time. I
certainly became aware of it quickly thereafter.
the people who I asked for advice, for example,
Lyman Spitzer at Princeton, did not think
planetary science was a third-rate field, maybe
in part because Lyman had done some planetary
science himself. He was, for example, the source
of the then primary objection to the jean's
jeffrey's view of the origin of the solar system by
the close encounter of two stars and had also been
doing work on the escape of planetary atmospheres
So maybe I had to buy a sample, but in any case, by the
time I got to Chicago and talked to some of the
stellar astronomers there, it got across to me
very strongly. If I had known about it beforehand,
it wouldn't have affected me in the least, because
I knew exactly what I was interested in, and no
rational argument would have dissuaded me, much
less an irrational argument. So what was your
doctoral dissertation? My doctoral
dissertation was called... physical studies of
planets, which was very broad to encompass a bunch
of things. The main part of it, by far, was
something called the radiation balance of Venus,
which was an attempt to show that the high
microwave brightness temperature of Venus, as
found by Cornell Mayer and others, by
ground-based radio telescopes, had, as its most
natural explanation, a massive greenhouse
effect in which carbon dioxide and water vapor
played the main role. And there were some
subsidiary parts to it, one of which was work I had
done partly with Stanley Miller on the radiation
chemistry of a simulated Jovian atmosphere in
which we... I think it's the first time anyone had
done a laboratory study of... jovian atmosphere
in which we made simple organic molecules, almost
all of which have now been discovered on Jupiter.
Who was your thesis advisor? Koepper. What was he
like? That's a very complicated question. No, the
question is very simple. It's a very complicated
answer. For me, he was, as far as the science goes,
tremendously stimulating, a source of
information on absolutely everything from the
Tisserand criterion in celestial mechanics to
the lifestyles of lichens. He was the first person
I ever saw given a fresh problem to literally do a
back-of-the-envelope calculation. I mean
literally on the back of an envelope. The power of
knowing enough first principles physics to
address a new problem just off the top of your head
and see if proposed solutions came anywhere close
was truly breathtaking to me. And this was before I
had seen it in any of my physics classes. I saw it in
Gerard's hands. And he was a strongly supportive
person. of my interests, as strange as some of them
were. I was interested in extraterrestrial life,
among other things. He was temperamental. He had
his quarrels with other scientists, but he was
entirely supportive of me, including finding
ways for me to supplement my income.
And another thing which I very much appreciate is
that he did not force a doctoral thesis on me. He let
me generate my own topics, which I, especially in
retrospect, very much appreciate.
I want to skip now because we don't have very much
time.
Well, I remember when the journal Icarus first
came out. It seemed to me it was full of mostly
celestial mechanics from former East Block
astronomers that I never heard of. And then you
became editor in the early 60s. How did that
happen? How did they talk you into it, or did you
talk yourself into it? No, no, I didn't talk myself
into it. I don't fully understand why Zdenek Kopal
and A.G. Wilson... decided not to be editors
anymore, or were asked by academic press not to be
editors. I just don't know that information, and I
never asked. But what I do know is I was asked. They
had asked me to be an associate editor from the
beginning, and I was happy to do that. That was fun.
And I published a few papers in there. I did not do
anything in the way of editorial function. And
then they came to me together and asked if I would be
interested in replacing them as editor. And I was
really quite young and very flattered. It seemed
to me to be a great thing to do, a wonderful way to
find out what's happening in the field. And I had
very definite ideas about how to improve the
journal, one of which was to have referees, which,
while not a novel idea in general, was novel for
Icarus. And for some reason, which I don't know, I
mean, I generally don't know, and it wasn't a thing
that I felt comfortable asking, I don't know why
they chose me. There was a feeling, a very strong
feeling among the few people who were doing
planetary astronomy at that time, that the
Astrophysical Journal just didn't want to
publish any astronomy, and this held for radio
astronomy too, planetary astronomy. And it
helped for radio as well. My first publication was
in the Proceedings of the IRE.
So there was a definite need for Icarus. How did you
go about getting the papers? Okay, let me say, I
mean, I've heard this about Apjay, but my
experience was that, I mean, I sent a bunch of
papers to Apjay in the 60s, and they were all
refereed and accepted and There was one wild paper
that Russ Walker and I sent called On the
Detectability of Dyson Civilizations, which was
also published. So I never experienced that
hostility at Apchang. But others have mentioned
it, and I can't make rhyme or reason of it. But as to
how I solicited papers for Icarus, well, you know,
there was a small number of people, and I said to
them, look, we're doing well, we're
concentrating on planetary science. Here is a
journal in which you find only planetary science
papers, not diluted by a vast array of papers on
quite different subjects. And there are no paid
charges, and We have glossy stock, and that means
we can print nice renditions of photographs. And
some papers I solicited. I said to someone, so
you're the right person to review this subject. It
needs a broad perspective. Why don't you do that
for Icarus?
But a lot of papers came unsolicited. And, you
know, as soon as a few good papers were published,
then other people noticed it. And it prospered.
There's a sort of exponential built into it. What
do you think the status of planetary astronomy is
today among, quote, real, unquote, astronomers?
Well, I think the degree of respectability has
improved dramatically. Nevertheless, there is
still the sense in many people's mind of
respectability being directly proportional to
distance or maybe to a high power of the distance of
the astronomical object examined. And since the
planets are nearby, they're considered
disreputable. In part, this is I think due to
excesses by such people as Percival Lowell. But
it's a kind of snooty attitude, which... I think is
best to simply avoid. I mean, just ignore. One
thing I noticed is that when the government
started spending large amounts of money on
planetary science, especially sending
spacecraft to the planets, the respectability of
planetary science made a dramatic increment.
While you were editor of Vickers, what fraction of
your time did you spend on the journal? It wasn't
vast. Maybe... I don't know. It's hard to
estimate. If I were to give very broad limits, I
would say between 10% and 25%, something like
that. And it varied from month to month and year to
year. I should say that at a critical time, I had the
luck to have Steve Soder as assistant editor, and
that really helped a lot. How did Icarus get to be
the official journal of the Division for
Planetary Science of the American Astronomical
Society? Well, here was Icarus just being
published by a commercial publisher, and here was
DBS, which I had helped found, having no journal
affiliated with it. And there were other
institutions, professional societies that had
their journals, lots of them. American
Geophysical Union had Journal of Geophysical
Research and so on. It was such a natural idea, and
so I pushed it, and then there was a time when I was
president of the DPS, and I had a chance to push it
harder, and people saw the wisdom of it, and nobody
was trying to force any editorial policy down
people's throats. There's an appointed advisory
board that has a lot to say about what happens, and
It was just an obvious marriage to be made, and I had
the pleasure of being the marriage broker. What do
you think is the current status and the outlook for
the near future for planetary astronomy? Up,
down, hanging in there? Planetary astronomy or
planetary science? Both. Well,
you know, it depends very much on funding. And
funding depends very much on Congress, and
Congress depends very much on the health of the
national economy and also the sense that
taxpayers have about this being something worth
spending money on. And all these items are very
hard to predict.
The practical question is if a bright, young,
motivated, scientist comes to me starting
graduate school and says, I want to be a planetary
scientist, would you recommend that I do it or not?
I still, by and large, recommend that they do it.
And so that's...
Well, that's true. That's absolutely right. And
certainly the number, absolute number of jobs
available today is vastly more than it was in the
50s in any kind of astronomy. But still, if you
thought the thing was headed towards some
free-fall collapse, you wouldn't recommend that
students pursue their interest there. I don't
think we're in desperate straits, although it's
very hard when you don't know about continuity of
funding and all sorts of programs started and
stopped seemingly whimsically. It's very tough,
especially for the younger people. You know, if
you have If you have tenure or you've been
successful in research programs, you have some
likelihood of continuity, but young people
don't. And the thing I'm most worried about is not
the older folks, but the really young people.
There I'm worried that we're not preserving our
options for the future as we ought. Do you think
that planetary scientists and planetary
astronomers have done a good job in selling
themselves to the public and to the Congress? No
and no. I think that planetary missions have done
an excellent job of selling planetary science to
the public and the Congress. Of course, in the
context of the Cold War, Many people understood
each planetary mission triumph as another way
that we beat the Russians, and that put a
particular skew to public appreciation. But
despite that, I think understanding these
missions for their own sake, for their true merit,
did get through. Now that we have lots of improved
visual techniques,
including false color photography and
virtual reality movies, in which we dive down to a
planetary surface, we have extraordinary tools
to interest the public in what we do, which I still
think we don't use adequately enough. And I think
many scientists, if the funding dried up, would
suddenly say, oh my goodness, I wish we had spent
more time on popularizing what we do with the
general public. What impact, if any, do you think
the fact that we haven't found any traces of life
anywhere else in the solar system, and in
particular not on Mars, what effect, if any, do you
think that's had on funding?
I don't think it's had any perceptible effect on
funding. If you look at the NASA expenditures for
robotic missions, you see a big blip for Viking.
But if you subtract, which I think is attributable
to the interest in the search for life, but apart
from that, it's reasonably flat. So I don't think
there was a depression after Viking. We just
returned to where we were in any case. And I think if
NASA had had the courage to follow up Viking with
further searches for life or life-oriented
understanding of the past environment of Mars,
they could have maintained the Viking blip. This
is a different sort of a question. The former
Soviet Union had a lot of people called
astronomers and space scientists and all this,
and they really didn't do much. Do you have an
opinion as to why? Yeah, because they were living
in the former Soviet Union. I mean, you know, you
can criticize some people didn't get a good
education and there wasn't adequate peer review.
especially with people who were politically
connected, and Soviet scientists weren't
willing to criticize each other in international
forums for patriotic reasons, and all of that. But
the fundamental reason, I believe, is that the
living conditions were impossibly hard. And I was
continually amazed when we go over there to see the
circumstances in which not just any astronomers,
the best astronomers were living. And I remember
seeing the little... alcove that Shklovsky and P.
Kellner and Kaplan had to share at the...
Sorry, I've forgotten the Astronomical
Institute of the University of Moscow. It's named
after somebody. Sternberg. The Sternberg
Astronomical Institute. And that was very good
conditions compared to living arrangements.
standing in line for food and all of that. It is
remarkable that anything was accomplished by
Soviet astronomers. What do you think is the best
piece of work you've done so far? I tend not to try to
pick out bests and worsts. Maybe one thing that I'm
pleased about is that my interest in the search for
life elsewhere led me to all sorts of things
completely unconnected with life. In trying to
understand the habitability of Venus, I was drawn
irresistibly to the conclusion that the surface
was far too hot for life. In trying to understand
the seasonal changes on Mars, which had been
widely attributed to the growth and seasonal
decay of vegetation, led irresistibly to
windblown dust. So I guess one thing I'm pleased
about is that my interest in extraterrestrial
life did not prevent me, in fact led me to a wide
range of other subjects with quite different
physics. Look at the difference between aeolian
transport and And greenhouse radiative balance
and search for life are quite different. But I've
done a whole lot of things, and some of them I'm very
pleased with, and others I wish I had done better
on. I may have asked you this, but I'll ask again. Do
you think planetary astronomy is part of
astronomy? Sure, sure. And you might say that
spacecraft make it somewhat non-astronomical.
If you can fly to orbit, land on a world, then why
would you spend any time peering at it through a
ground-based telescope? And to a large extent,
that's true. But there are lots of worlds we can't
fly to, or can't fly to often. And we are shortly
going, I think very likely, going to be...
examining planets around other stars that we
surely are not going to be flying to shortly. And
that means that ground-based and
near-Earth-based planetary science is going to
be with us for a very long time. And that kind of
stuff, that kind of science, is a part of
astronomy. What's the role of NASA money been in
resurrecting what was essentially a dead field?
absolutely fundamental. NASA, as far as funding
goes and other kinds of support, never mind space
missions. Just on the ground-based end of things
and the theoretical end of things and the
laboratory simulation end of things has been
absolutely essential in the renaissance of this
field. And then if you add this astonishing
capability that we now have to go to other planets
and see what they're like. NASA's role is key,
central, and historic for all the
arteriosclerotic problems with NASA these days.
What's your opinion of how NSA manages the
planetary program? Do they micromanage? Do they
do about the right thing? Again, a personal view.
There's so many aspects, and it's been so variable
over the years, it's really hard to give a one-bit
yes or no answer. I would say that given the
existing funding constraints, NASA has not been
orders of magnitude too generous or too
impecunious. But if you ask me whether it's made
wrong decisions, and fail to see something which
was tremendously promising or spend lots of money
on something which was a dead end or
scientifically not very exciting, of course
that's happened. It's happened a lot, perhaps too
much. But overall, I think for all its flaws, NASA
has done a fantastic job in the support of
planetary science.